**THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA**

**NATIONAL EKAMINATIONS COUNCIL**

**CERTIFICATE OF SECONDARY EDUCATION EKAMINATION**

**041 BASIC MATHEMATICS**
TIME: 3 hours 14 January 1999 A.M.
Instructions

1. This paper consists of sections A and B
to
Answer ALL questions in section A and any FOUR (4) questions from section B in the answer books provided.

3. All necessary working and answers for each guestion done must be shownclearly.

4. Mathematical tables and graph papers may be used unless otherwise stated.

5. You are advised to spend not more than two (2) hours on section A and not more than one (1)
hour on section B.

6. The following constants may be used where necessary:
m= 22
7
Radius of the earth = 640@kin
This paper consists ef 5 printed pages and 3 blank pages.

2

## SECTION A (60 marks)
Answer ALL guestions in this section

1. (a) (i) Express 23. 123 as a fraction.
(ii) Evaluate (9876 - 4321] + 55 - 74643
(b) Ifx + y = 7, evaluate y7°+4x"
xy

2. (a) 1f A and B are any two disjoint sets, show the region represented by A’) B’ ona
Venn diagram.
(b) There are 30 men at a wedding. Twenty are businessmen, twelve are fishermen and
6 are both businessmen and fishermen.
(i) How many are neither businessmen nor fishermen?
(ii) How many are either businessmen or fishermen?
3, (a) (i) What is the sum of the interior angles of an octagon?
(ii) Find the size of the exterior angle of a regular octagon.
aA
(b) In the figure drawn below find the value of x if B=37°.

4. (a) -1n the following equations solve form:-
(ii) log m = 3 log 6 - 1 log 125 - 4 log 3 - log 16
3 3

(b) Using the number line. show the solution set of:
4x-3<¢3-34x

5. Given the vectors; a =-i+ Hs b = Si - 2j andc = 4a + 3b.
(a) Find the magnitude of vector c.
(b) Find the unit vector in the direction of vector d. where d = 2a - 3b a

6. Iff(x) = 5x? + 17x - 12
(a) (i) Evaluate f(1@) - f (5)
(ii) Factorize f(x)
(b) Determine the domain and range of f(x)
. 7. Acar moving with an initial velocity of 40m/s accelerates uniformly at 2. 5m/s? for 5 seconds. Find
{a) the maximum velocity attained.
(b) the distance travelled during the 4” second.

8. (a) | What value of t will make the line passing through the points A(-5,t)
and B (1,2) perpendicular to the line passing through points
C(-1,2) and D(5, 1)?
(b) | Without using tables, evaluate sin 75°
(c) Anobserver on top of acliff, 25m above sea level views a boat on the sea at an angle of depression of 75”. How far is the boat from the foot of the cliff?
ww SECTION B [40 marks]
Answer any four (4) questions from this section. Show ALL your necessary steps and answers clearly.

9. (a) By shading the unrequired part, show the region represented by the following set of inequalities:
y<4
ORES
5x + 4y < 20
x20andy 20
904!

(b) A bread dealer can buy up to 150 loaves of bread. Premium bread costs 209/- per loaf and
Royal bread costs 25@/= per loaf. The dealer can spend not more than 36,00@/= in the business. Premium bread sells at a profit of 40/= per loaf while, Royal bread sells at a profit of 5@% per loaf. How many loaves of bread of each type should the dealer buy in order to generate a maximum profit?
10 (a) Find the image of the point (2. 5) after rotation by 90° anticlockwise about the origin.
(b) A translation T maps the origin onto the point (-2,3)
   A second translation S maps the origin onto the point (1,-2)
Find where T followed by S will take the point (4,-5).
(c) A linear transformation M maps the point (x,y) onto (x’.y’) where
Ey 2 y y =2x ty
(1) Write the matrix M of this transformation.
(ii) What is the matrix M” or the inverse of M?
(iii) Compute the product matrix MM".

11. (a) PQRS is a cyclic quadrilateral and PQ is produced to T. Prove that:
ROT = PSR
(b) Calculate the surface distance along latitude 30° N covered between longitudes 60" E and 65? W.
(c) Calculate the volume of the earth.
904!

904)

12. (a) (i) Find the kth term of the series
10454
~~)
+
S+5+..., where k = 1,2,3,...
4 8
NI
(ii) The arithmetic mean and geometric mean of two numbers mand nare 17 and 15
respectively. Find the two numbers.
(b) Find the difference between the sums of the first ten terms of the geometric progressions whose first terms are 7 and9 and common ratios are 3 and 2
respectively.

13. (a) Draw the plan, front and side elevation of a circularcone with its base on the horizontai plane (in first angle projection) given that the height of the cone is 3cm and its base radius is 2 cm.
(b) Find the surface area of the cone described in 13 (a) above.

14. The heights in centimetres of 100 students of a certain school were recorded as follows:-
Height in
Centimetres 150 | 155 | 160 | 165 | 170 | 175 | 180 | 185 | 190
4 [9 [ie | 6 jes Pot 8 4 [2 |
From the above information answer the following questions:
(a) Draw a frequency polygon
(b) Determine the mean, median and mode
(c) Compute the variance and standard deviation.
(d) A student is chosen at random from this school. What is the probability that his height is greater than 160 cm?